---
path: "/chapters/eth2-overview"
title: "Eth2 Overview"
---

## Understanding Proof of Stake

### Proof of Work: The Incumbent
Blockchains are, fundamentally, consensus mechanisms in which participants come to agreement about a canonical ordered series of transaction blocks. Although there are many different ways in which participants can actually come to an agreement about these blocks, blockchains consensus mechanisms tend to fall into certain classes. Most early blockchain protocols made use of "Proof of Work" consensus mechanisms. Proof of Work is, at its core, based on the concept that the weight of one's voting power in the consensus process is based on the extent of one's expenditure of physical computational resources. Proof of Work systems generally state that a new block is only considered valid if a certain amount of computational effort has been expended in the block's creation. Practically, this typically means that the hash of the new block is less than or equal to a given target value. As secure hash functions are computationally infeasible to reverse, this means that a block producer is required to grind hashes until the target hash is reached.

Proof of Work has several obvious flaws. It clearly relies on the expenditure of precious resources in the form of the energy required to operate hash-computing machines. Furthermore, efficient hash-computing machinery can be a huge advantage in a Proof of Work system. Unfortunately, the ability for a party to create or acquire this machinery is highly dependent on the resources and knowledge available to that party. As a result, these systems tend toward centralization. As this section is not intended to act as a complete argument against Proof of Work consensus protocols, readers interested in understanding the various arguments for (and against) Proof of Work should direct their attention to the following articles.

### Proof of Stake: The Alternative
Proof of Stake has evolved as a proposed alternative to Proof of Work. In short, Proof of Stake replaces the computation-based voting weight with a weight based purely on the value of economic resources placed as a bond, or stake, into the system. This model theoretically follows the same ideology of Proof of Work, but eschews wasteful computation in favor of a more direct representation of interest in the mechanism. Proof of Stake systems attempt to re-create the properties of Proof of Work by randomly assigning the right to produce blocks based on the percentage of assets stake in the system.

#### Coming to Consensus
Although Proof of Stake is theoretically similar to Proof of Work, Proof of Stake introduces several interesting problems. Many of these problems arise from the increase in subjectivity brought by the lack of direct connection to the physical world via hash-computing machinery. One such problem is revealed when we consider how validators should react to forks in the blockchain. In a Proof of Work system, participants cannot split their computational power over multiple possible forks without also proportionally splitting their chances to find the next target hash. However, in a Proof of Stake system, participants can easily create votes for two different forks without expending significant resources. If this behavior is permitted, then Proof of Stake validators will be incentivized to vote on every fork as to avoid losing out on rewards in the case that some unexpected fork becomes the "canonical" chain.

We often refer to this interesting theoretical result as the "nothing-at-stake" problem, and it necessitates much of the early stages of Eth2. We begin the next section with a deep exploration of Ethereum's proposed solution to this problem, Casper FFG. Casper FFG introduces the concept of "epochs," fixed periods of time, that contain "boundary blocks" which can become "finalized" and therefore absolutely canonical and irreversible. Validators that attempt to fork out "finalized" blocks are heavily punished and, therefore, no longer have "nothing-at-stake."

Although Casper FFG addresses a key theoretical barrier for Proof of Stake systems, it does not specify a consensus mechanism for blocks within a particular epoch. We therefore spend a section discussing LMD GHOST, an algorithm used by validators to determine the "correct" chain in the short-term and eventually the "final" chain in the long-term.

#### Moving Toward the Future
Casper FFG and LMD GHOST are both used by validators to make decisions about the current set of canonical blocks. However, neither mechanism actually defines how blocks are produced. We therefore conclude this section with an introduction to the Eth2 block proposal mechanism and the various cryptographic primitives upon which it relies. We explore this mechanism in more detail in later sections, but provide a strong basic intuition. For simplicity, we do not dive deeply into the underlying mathematics behind the cryptographic primitives but instead provide resources for interested readers to explore the constructions on their own.
