---
path: "/chapters/building-blocks/bls-signatures"
title: "BLS Signatures"
---


## Background
BLS signatures are an important part of PoS. Basically, one big problem in traditional systems is signatures. Let's first explain how signatures work at a high-level. The idea is that you have some secret piece of information (private key) with a corresponding public piece of information (public key). Your public key cannot be used to derive your private key BUT it does have a cool feature that you can use your private key and a mathematical operation to "sign" a message (create a "signature message") that can be "verified" to have corresponded to your private key by anyone with access to your public key. So long. Simplified, anyone can take your signature and your public key and see that the operation must have been performed with message,private key and therefore the person with the private key is "attesting" to the message.

One of the big problems with signatures so far is that signatures are really slow to verify. Like supah slow. This is a huge amount of overhead on any blockchain. But this becomes a big problem in the context of PoS because signatures are actually sort of equivalent to "work" in PoW. When we verify the "work" in PoW, we're doing a very fast operation (hashing). However, we have hundreds or thousands or millions of signatures to verify every epoch. These signatures are NOT fast to verify. If we just take an ETHereum signature, verifying one signature takes 2ms. Verifying 1000 signatues would take 2 seconds. Verifying 1000000 signatures would take 2000 seconds or a full 30 minutes... Just not feasible. Multithreading can help, but this is just unreal if we expect that there are 4m signatures. Also, these things are very big and we would need to store them all, which is just too much data. The full data calculation is here and it's big.

So instead, smart people at standford came up with a new signature scheme called BLS which allows for a thing caleld aggregaiton. The idea here is taht we can take multiple signatures and combine them into one signature that's faster to verify than each individual signature and it's even a constant size! no moer big bytes. The underlying math here is very complex, but generally speaking it uses a lot of the core concepts of other curve-based crypto with the addition of an interesting ocncept of "pairing" (not explained). you can ead more about it here. 

One thing to note with BLS is that although aggregation of signatures on different messages is slightly more efficient than each individual signature, the real speed-up is with signatures on the same message. YOu can imagein why this would be, information theoretically. We're sharing the same info between each signature, so there's less to do. This does mean, however, that we raelly get the advantages of BLS when everyone is signing the same information using their own private key. This means that we really prefer "well aggregated" signatreus. This is fine because we have committees that are generally going to be signing the same thing, and we add some incentivizes (later explained) for people to be signing the same thing. But yes we want good aggregaiton because otherwise we dunhave lots of expensive ass sgnatures.